# **Install IBM Software Hub**</br>*On-Premises Installation and Deployment*

!!! quote ""
    The following section is based off of IBM Documentation for <a href="https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/software-hub/5.1.x?topic=installing-preparing-install-instance-software-hub" target="_blank">**Preparing to install an instance of IBM Software Hub**</a>.

## **i. Install shared components**

Before an instance of IBM Software Hub can be installed, you need to install a set of shared services on the OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) cluster: a **license service** and a **scheduler**.

---

1. Three environment variables were "set" earlier in this lab, which are pertinent now to the license service (as well as the scheduler) that IBM Software Hub requires. These include:
    - `$PROJECT_LICENSE_SERVICE`
    - `$PROJECT_SCHEDULING_SERVICE`
    - `$VERSION`
    
    Refresh yourself on these variable's values by **executing** the following:

    ``` shell
    echo $PROJECT_LICENSE_SERVICE
    echo $PROJECT_SCHEDULING_SERVICE
    echo $VERSION
    ```

    These variables were defined within the **Cloud Pak for Data (CP4D) Environment Variable** (<a href="https://ibm.github.io/wca-l4/on-premises/3/#iv-environment-variables" target="_blank">**Step 8 of Module 3**</a>) on Lines 35, 36, and 53, respectively.

---

2. Install the **license service** components by executing the following command:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage apply-cluster-components \
    --release=${VERSION} \
    --license_acceptance=true --licensing_ns=${PROJECT_LICENSE_SERVICE}
    ```

    !!! warning ""
        This operation will take approximately **10 minutes** to complete.

---

3. Install the **scheduling service** by executing the following command:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage apply-scheduler \
    --release=${VERSION} \
    --license_acceptance=true \
    --scheduler_ns=${PROJECT_SCHEDULING_SERVICE}
    ```

    !!! warning ""
        This operation will take approximately **10 minutes** to complete.

---

## **ii. Install an instance of IBM Software Hub**

Finally, the cluster has been prepared to a state where it is ready to install an instance of IBM Software Hub. Although the following section requires relatively few inputs from the participant, it will take approximately 45 minutes for the installation process to complete.

---

4. Create the two new projects that will host your instance by **executing** the following instructions within a Terminal console:

    ``` shell
    oc new-project ${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERATORS}
    oc new-project ${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS}
    ```

---

5. **Apply** the required permissions for an instance of IBM Software Hub:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage authorize-instance-topology \
    --cpd_operator_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERATORS} \
    --cpd_instance_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS}
    ```
    !!! warning ""
        This operation will take approximately **1 minute** to complete.

---

6. Create the instance by **executing** the following code block:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage setup-instance \
    --release=${VERSION} \
    --license_acceptance=true \
    --cpd_operator_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERATORS} \
    --cpd_instance_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS} \
    --block_storage_class=${STG_CLASS_BLOCK} \
    --file_storage_class=${STG_CLASS_FILE} \
    --run_storage_tests=true
    ```

    !!! warning ""
        This operation will take approximately **45 minutes** to complete.

---

## **iii. Next steps**

With IBM Software Hub now successfully deployed on the OCP cluster, the environment is primed for the installation of IBM watsonx Code Assistant.

??? note "TROUBLESHOOTING: LOGGING IN AND SESSION TIMEOUTS"
    Be aware that SSH connections made over Terminal will time out after a long period of inactivity or due to a connection error. If you need to log back into the bastion terminal, follow the procedure below. Replace the `<BASTION_PWD>` placeholder with the password specific to *your* environment.

    1. Log back into the bastion node:

        ``` shell
        ssh itzuser@api.67828ca5e432cac47ccc4230.ocp.techzone.ibm.com -p 40222 <BASTION_PWD>
        ```
    
    2. Engage the `sudo` (privileged access) session:

        ``` shell
        sudo bash
        ```

    3. Source the environment variables stored in `cpd_vars.sh`:

        ``` shell
        source cpd_vars.sh
        ```

    4. Log back into OpenShift:

        ``` shell
        ${OC_LOGIN}
        ```

    5. Log back into `cpd-cli`:

        ``` shell
        ${CPDM_OC_LOGIN}
        ```