# **Install IBM watsonx Code Assistant**</br>*On-Premises Installation and Deployment*

!!! quote ""
    The following section is based off of IBM Documentation for <a href="https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/software-hub/5.1.x?topic=wca-installing" target="_blank">**Installing watsonx Code Assistant v5.1.x**</a>.

## **i. Fetching dependencies**

In the following section, you will assume the role of an instance administrator and install IBM watsonx Code Assistant (WCA) using the IBM Software Hub components set up in the previous module. Following the release of Software Hub `v5.x`, administrators need to only specify the `watsonx-code-assistant` component in order for the Software Hub to automatically fetch the required dependencies.

---

1. Apply the entitlement for WCA by **executing** the following code block:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage apply-entitlement \
    --cpd_instance_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS} \
    --entitlement=watsonx-code-assistant \
    --production=true
    ```

---

2. Now that the components have been defined, install the services Operators by **executing** the following code block:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage apply-olm \
    --release=${VERSION} \
    --cpd_operator_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERATORS} \
    --components=${COMPONENTS} 
    ```
    !!! warning ""
        Completion of this operation will take approximately **10 minutes**.

---

## **ii. Installing software**

Creating the custom resources for watsonx Code Assistant and kicking off the installation process is achieved with relatively few inputs from the administrator.

---

3. Start the installation process for WCA by executing the following code block:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage apply-cr \
    --release=${VERSION} \
    --cpd_instance_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS} \
    --components=${COMPONENTS} \
    --block_storage_class=${STG_CLASS_BLOCK} \
    --file_storage_class=${STG_CLASS_FILE} \
    --license_acceptance=true
    ```

    !!! warning ""
        Completion of this operation will take approximately **1 hour**, after which the console will return:
        ``` shell
        [SUCCESS]... The apply-cr command ran successfully
        ```

---

4. Once the installation procedure of Step 3 has wrapped up, retrieve the details about the WCA instance by **executing** the following:

    ``` shell
    cpd-cli manage get-cpd-instance-details \
    --cpd_instance_ns=${PROJECT_CPD_INST_OPERANDS} \
    --get_admin_initial_credentials=true
    ```

---

5. **Record** the provided endpoint *URL*, *Username*, and *Password* details.

---

## **iii. Next steps**

Congratulations — you have successfully completed the installation of IBM watsonx Code Assistant within an on-premises environment! The final module of the *On-Premises Installation and Deployment* chapter will debrief you on the lessons learned and provide context for the remaining sections of the Level 4 curriculum.

??? note "TROUBLESHOOTING: LOGGING IN AND SESSION TIMEOUTS"
    Be aware that SSH connections made over Terminal will time out after a long period of inactivity or due to a connection error. If you need to log back into the bastion terminal, follow the procedure below. Replace the `<BASTION_PWD>` placeholder with the password specific to *your* environment.

    1. Log back into the bastion node:

        ``` shell
        ssh itzuser@api.67828ca5e432cac47ccc4230.ocp.techzone.ibm.com -p 40222 <BASTION_PWD>
        ```
    
    2. Engage the `sudo` (privileged access) session:

        ``` shell
        sudo bash
        ```

    3. Source the environment variables stored in `cpd_vars.sh`:

        ``` shell
        source cpd_vars.sh
        ```

    4. Log back into OpenShift:

        ``` shell
        ${OC_LOGIN}
        ```

    5. Log back into `cpd-cli`:

        ``` shell
        ${CPDM_OC_LOGIN}
        ```