# **Full stack modernization**</br>*Application Modernization - WebSphere to Liberty*

## **i. Objectives**

As a capstone to the experimentation and feature-exploration conducted with **IBM watsonx Code Assistant** (**WCA**) in the previous modules of this lab, participants will conclude the *Application Modernization* topic with a hands-on opportunity: modernization of a full-stack WebSphere Application Service (WAS) application into WebSphere Liberty.

Participants will be tasked with:

- Explaining the purpose of the legacy WAS code and detailing the necessary transformations
- Modernizing legacy packages and libraries from WAS to Liberty
- Upgrading Java versions from `Java 8` to `Java 21`
- Code recommendations will be generated using *WCA Chat*, as in the previous modules, alongside the *Modernize* and *Java Upgrade* capabilities built into WCA Standard plans

The culmination of this work will be a fully modernized and interactive web application that tangibly demonstrates the benefits of the techniques discussed throughout this lab.

---

## **ii. Setting up**

</br>

1. Return to the Visual Studio Code (VS Code) application. It should already be signed in and authenticated with the WCA service on IBM Cloud — if it's not, follow the instructions in the <a href="https://ibm.github.io/wca-l4/saas/4/#iii-install-the-extension" target="_blank">**IBM Cloud (SaaS) Configuration**</a> lab.

---

2. Additional software must be prepared within VS Code before continuing with WCA Standard Plan's enterprise capabilities for WebSphere modernization.

    - From the left-hand side of the VS Code interface, click the **Extensions** tab
        - Within the *Extensions: Marketplace* **search bar**, search for `Liberty Tools`
        - Click the blue **Install** button to the right of the *Liberty Tools* tile
        - Dismiss any "Welcome" splash screens
    - Once the install is complete, return to the **Extensions** tab again
        - Within the *Extensions: Marketplace* **search bar**, search for `Extension Pack for Java`
        - Click the blue **Install** to the right of the *Extension Pack for Java* tile
        - Wait for the install to complete and dismiss any "Welcome" splash screens

---

3. **Download** the WebSphere Application Server (WAS) assets that are to be modernized from the following GitHub repository:

    </br>
    !!! warning ""
        **URL:** <a href="https://github.com/sidharthmittal25/wca4ej-workshop/tree/main" target="_blank">https://github.com/sidharthmittal25/wca4ej-workshop/tree/main</a>

    </br>
    Click the **Code** button to open a drop-down menu of options. Choose one of the following:

    - Copy the **GitHub CLI** command line instructions and paste these into the VS Code terminal (open the Terminal by clicking **Terminal** > **New Terminal** from the top taskbar)
    - Alternatively, click **Download ZIP** to download the assets directly to your local desktop with the web browser

---

## **iii. Deploy the application**

</br>

4. Next, you will need to build the application *Project*. Open a **Terminal** within VS Code (if you haven't already) by clicking **Terminal** > **New Terminal** from the top taskbar.

    - Navigate using the Terminal to the *Project* folder where you saved `wca4ej-workshop` in Step 3
    - Replace the `<your-path>` variable with the path to where that folder was saved
    - With a Terminal console, execute the following instruction:

    ``` shell
    cd <your-path>/wca4ej-workshop/modresorts-twas-j8/was_dependency
    ```

---

5. Once inside the folder, run the following command to *build* the application project:

    ``` shell
    mvn install:install-file -Dfile=was_public.jar -DpomFile=was_public-9.0.0.pom
    ```

    !!! warning "WINDOWS USERS"
        Windows users might need to provide the full path for the build files `was_public.jar` and `was_public-9.0.0.pom`, for example:
        ``` shell
        mvm install:install-file -Dfile=C:\Users\Administrator.CE-APAC-WIND202\Documents\wca4ej-workshop\modresorts\twas\j8\was_dependency\was_public.jar
         -Dpom-File=C:\Users\Administrator.CE-APAC-WIND202\Documents\wca4ej-workshop\modresorts-twas-j8\was_dependency\was_public-9.0.0.pom
        ```

---

6. With the application project built and the *Liberty Tools* extension added to VS Code, click the **watsonx Code Assistant** tab from the left-hand interface.

    - Look for a **Liberty Dashboard** drop-down panel amongst the tabs
    - Click the **Add project to Liberty Dashboard** button
    - Specify the path to the `modresort-twas-j8` folder

---

7. After selecting the application project, a `modresorts` app will show up under the *Liberty Dashboard* panel.

    - Right click on the `modresorts` project name to open the drop-down menu of options
    - Click **Start** to initialize the project
    - VS Code will automatically download the necessary packages (you can trace the progress within the Terminal console)
    - **Wait** until the initialization process has finished and the console has returned a `Source compilation was successful` message
    - **Copy** and record the **Web application URL** returned by the Terminal console (`http://localhost:9080/resorts` or similar)

---

8. Open a new web browser tab and visit the **Web application URL** recorded in Step 7. Explore and familiarize yourself with the various tabs and pages built into the legacy web application.

    !!! warning "ERRORS AND BROKEN WEB LINKS"
        As the legacy application has been built for WebSphere Application Server (WAS) using `Java 8`, but the deployment generated in Step 7 was intended for WebSphere Liberty using `Java 21`, there are a number of pages within the app that will produce an "Error" — for example, the location information module. These will be aspects of the application that you will remedy as part of the modernization steps that follow.

---

## **iv. Explain the project code**

</br>

Let's better understand the entirety of the project by using the **explainability** features built into watsonx Code Assistant.

---

9. Open the **Explorer** tab from the left-hand interface to view the contents of the `modresorts-twas-j8` project
    
    - Right-click on `modresorts-twas-j8` to open a drop-down menu of options
    - Hover over the **watsonx Code Assistant** option and then select **Explain Application**
    - When prompted, click **Proceed with code analysis**
    - Wait approximately **1-2 minutes** for the analysis to complete, at which time a pop-up will appear in the bottom-right corner of VS Code stating that `The explanation has been completed`
    - Click the **Open explanation** button within the pop-up to open and peruse the report

---

## **v. Build a modernization plan**

</br>

Before modernizing the WAS application into Liberty, you'll need to scope out the necessary changes and level of effort required to do so. To obtain that understanding, you will need to generate a modernization plan using **<a href="https://www.ibm.com/products/cloud-pak-for-applications/transformation-advisor" target="_blank">IBM Cloud Transformation Advisor</a>**. For the purposes of this lab, one such plan has been prepared ahead of time and included within the `modresorts-twas-j8` project folder.

---

10. Open the **Explore** tab of VS Code and right click on `modresorts-twas-j8`. Then hover over **watsonx Code Assistant** and select **Modernize to Liberty**.

    - A *Modernize* tab will open on the right side of VS Code
    - Click the **Upload migration bundle** button
    - When prompted, specify `modresorts-twas-j8/migration-bundle/modresorts.ear_migrationBundle.zip` as the location of the migration bundle
    - **Select** both the `server.xml` and `Containerfile` assets, then click **Proceed**

---

11. Analysis will take a few moments to complete. When ready, the *Modernize* panel will generate a report that identifies issues with the application that need to be fixed. Some of these can be automatically repaired, while others will require a degree of manual intervention.

    - Under the **Issues** header, click the **Automated fixes** to pull open the list of 3 issues that can be automated
    - See more details about each by clicking the drop-down error to the right of the issue
    - Click the **Run automated fixes** button at the bottom of the page to execute the automated fixes to Liberty

---

12. View details about the fix(es) requiring a degree of manual intervention by clicking the **Assisted fixes** tab.

    - Along the top of the tab, left-click the grey **Instructions** panel to reveal the WCA-generated guidance on how to resolve the migration problems.
    - In this example, the `WebSphere Servlet API was superseded by a newer implementation` that uses `Servlet 3.0` functionality and as such a trio of packages used by the WAS app will no longer be available for use with Liberty
    - Further down the panel, a pointer to the impacted file(s) in the legacy code will be provided
    - **Click** the name of the impacted file to inspect its source code:
    
    ```
    src/main/java/com/acme/modres/UpperServlet.java
    ```

---

13. An editor window will open in VS Code, displaying the contents of `UpperServlet.java` for editing. The next set of instructions will follow along with the guidance recommended by the *Modernize* panel (on the right side of the VS Code interface):

    - Select all of the class that uses the `ResponseUtils.encodeDataString()` method, beginning on **Line 14** (`@WebServlet("/resorts/upper")`) and ending on **Line 27**
    - With the relevant code highlighted, click the **Help me** button in the *Modernize* panel

---

14. WCA will engage a *Chat* session and generate within the conversation **TWO** sets of code fixes that can be added to the legacy code in order to remedy the issue.

    </br>
    **Recommendation 1:** The first fix will be a *substitute* of the lines of code for `UpperServlet.java` that were copied in Step 13.

    ``` java
    import org. apache.commons.text.StringEscapeUtils;

    @WebServlet("/resorts/upper")
    public class UpperServlet extends HttpServley {
        ...
    }
    ```

    </br>
    **Recommendation 2:** The second fix will be *new* lines of code that are to be added to the `pom.xml` file.

    ``` java
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.apache.commons</groupId>
        <artifactId>commons-text</a>
        <version>1.12.0</version>
    </dependency>
    ```

---

15. Edit the contents of `UpperServlet.java` by **replacing** the highlighted lines of code (Step 13) with the WCA-generated **Recommendation 1** code (the first code block of Step 14).

    Save the changes to the file (**File** > **Save**).

---

16. Locate the `pom.xml` file from the list of assets under the **Explorer** tab.

    - Double-click on the filename to edit the contents
    - Beginning on **Line 59** of the `pom.xml` contents, **add** the contents of WCA's **Recommendation 2** (the second code block of Step 14) to the file
    - The new lines of code should now occupy Lines 59-63 of the modified `pom.xml` code
    - Save the changes to the file (**File** > **Save**)

---

17. With the application code now modified— by a combination of automated fixes and manual interventions —the original deployment launched in Step 4 will need to be re-deployed.

    - Return to the open VS Code **Terminal**
    - Press ++ctrl++ + ++c++ to terminate the application

---

18. To re-deploy the application, return to the **Modernize** panel (right hand side). Take note of the fact that all *Issues* previously reported by the tool have been resolved.

    - Click the **Rebuild and refresh** button to re-deploy the modernized application
    - Wait for the Terminal to report a successful deployment
    - **Refresh** the tab of the web application to inspect the modernized Liberty application
    - Previously broken features, such as the `Logout` button, should now be fully operable

---

## **vi. Java version upgrades**

</br>

Recall from before that the application's version of Java code was originally written for `Java 8`. However, to be compliant with modern versions of Liberty, that Java code will need to be upgraded to `Java 21`.

---

19. With the **Explorer** tab active, right click on the `modresorts-twas-j8` directory to expose a drop-down menu.

    - Hover over **watsonx Code Assistant**
    - Left click **Upgrade Java Version** to continue

---

20. A new *Upgrade* panel will open as a tab alongside the *Modernize* panel.

    - WCA will automatically detect that the code *Source* is designed for `IBM Java 8`
    - Set the *Target* parameter equal to `Java 21 (LTS)`
    - When ready, click the **Build and analyze** button

---

21. Similar to the *Modernize* steps previously, the *Upgrade* automation will generate a new **Issues** tab containing a list of potential fixes required before continuing with the Java version upgrade. Some of these tasks can be handled fully by automation; others will require some degree of manual intervention.

    - Select the **Automated fixes** tab first to identify three issues that can be resolved without human intervention
    - Click any of the recommended fixes to pull down additional information on what changes will be performed by the automation
    - When ready, click the **Run automated fixes** button to perform the tasks
    - Completion of the tasks may take several minutes to conclude

---

22. To examine the *Upgrade* tasks requiring human intervention, click the **Assisted fixes** tab.

    - Similarly to the *Modernization* panel, a description of the issue and detailed recommendations on how to perform the code fixes are listed within the tab
    - Click the name of the problematic file (`src/main/java/acme/modres/mbean/DMBeanUtils.java`) to open `DMBeanUtils.java` for editing and modification

---

23. According to WCA, there is an incompabitility with the `getOps` method within the `DMBeanUtils.java` codebase — specifically with the `MBeanOperationInfo` constructor that the method calls on line 28.

    - Click the **Help me** button to engage a new *WCA Chat* session
    - WCA will generate code recommendations within the *Chat* panel that can substitute the problematic legacy code
    - **Copy** the full `public final class DMBeanUtils {...}` code recommendation from the *Chat* panel to a clipboard
    - **Replace** the entire contents of the `DMBeanUtils.java` file with the recommendation from WCA
    - Save the changes to the file (**File** > **Save**)

---

24. There is a second *optional* recommendation available within the *Issues* tab of the **Upgrade** panel, but this can be safely **ignored** for now as it only relates to a deprecation warning.

---

25. With the application's Java version now upgraded to Java 21 by a combination of automated fixes and manual interventions —the application will once again need to be redeployed to reflect the changes.

    - Return to the open VS Code **Terminal**
    - Press ++ctrl++ + ++c++ to terminate the application

---

26. To re-deploy the application, return to the **Upgrade** panel (right hand side). Take note of the fact that all *Issues* previously reported by the tool have been resolved.

    - Click the **Rebuild and refresh** button to re-deploy the application
    - Wait for the Terminal to report a successful deployment
    - **Refresh** the tab of the web application to inspect the modernized Liberty application
    - Previously broken features, such as the `Location` module, should now be fully operable

---

## **vii. Conclusion**

Having concluded the **Application Modernization - WebSphere to Liberty** hands-on modules, participants should now complete the corresponding *Evaluation* quiz and then continue with the remainder of the Level 4 curriculum.