# **Install WCA extension for Eclipse IDE**</br>*IBM Cloud (SaaS) Configuration*


## **i. Objectives and rationale**

With the WCA service component of the SaaS architecture now successfully provisioned via the ITZ, participants will now need to set up the WCA extension within an integrated development environment (IDE). WCA currently supports both *Visual Studio Code* (**VS Code**) and *Eclipse IDE*.

This module guides participants through the process of installing Eclipse IDE on their local machine. Afterwards, the WCA extension ("plug-in") can then be easily integrated with the IDE and authorized for use with the ITZ-provisioned WCA service.

!!! note "WHY INSTALL LOCALLY?"
    Be aware that ITZ only allows two environments to be reserved for education and training purposes at any one time. Reservations for client demonstrations and pilots do not count against this limit.
    
    The WCA Standard plan on SaaS requires at least one reservation slot. The on-premises environment already provisioned through ITZ for the previous <a href="https://ibm.github.io/wca-l4/on-premises/1/" target="_blank">**On-Premises Installation and Deployment**</a> modules is occupying the second available slot. Provisioning an ITZ-hosted virtual machine (VM) environment will require a third slot — exceeding what ITZ supports. Therefore, to accommodate a virtualized desktop, participants would **need to retire and deprovision** the on-premises environment that they've already gone to great lengths to set up. Let's avoid that scenario, if possible.

    IBM watsonx Code Assistant works great on locally-installed IDEs via extensions built into VS Code and Eclipse IDE. In fact, it's the defacto way to interact with the service and provides the best impression for users by far — with a less cumbersome experience with the lab guide instructions and much more responsive IDE interactions.

## **ii. Create an API key**

!!! warning "AVOID RE-USING KEYS"
    Even if you've already generated an API key for the Visual Studio Code extension, it is recommended that you still create a different API key for Elcipse IDE.

Participants will need to create an API key and add the watsonx Code Assistant (WCA) extension to the Eclipse IDE once installed. Instead of a username and password, each developer uses a personal API key to log in.

---

1. Log in to the **IBM Cloud API Keys** web portal using an *IBMid*.

    !!! warning ""
        **URL: <a href="https://cloud.ibm.com/iam/apikeys" target="_blank">https://cloud.ibm.com/iam/apikeys</a>**

---

2. Click the **Create** button.

---

3. Enter `IBM watsonx Code Assistant API Key (Eclipse IDE)` as the name of the API key. Optionally, provide a description for the key.

    - When ready, click **Create**
    - **Download** a copy of the API key and **copy** the key to your clipboard
    - Save these records for reference later


## **iii. Locally install Eclipse IDE**

To install